+++
tags = ["dev-meeting"]
title = "Weekly Dev Meeting - Enhancing Connection Stability and Finalizing Transport Fixes"
date = 2024-05-24
+++

**Focus on Connection Stability and Transport Improvements**

Our primary focus has been on enhancing the stability and functionality of the connection and transport layers within
Freenet. Ignacio has dedicated significant effort to address issues related to the connect operation and transport
mechanisms. We’ve identified and resolved several bugs, ensuring that connections are maintained properly and cleaned up
when lost. Although we haven’t fully tested all scenarios, the connect operation is now functioning as expected.

**Handshake and Transport Challenges**

One of the main challenges we’re facing is with the handshake process. While it works most of the time, there are
occasional failures. Ignacio is concentrating on debugging this aspect, particularly the handshake failures, using
various unit tests. These tests sometimes provide errors without clear explanations, making the debugging process more
time-consuming.

**Refactoring and Streamlining Configuration**

We have also polished the startup process of the Freenet binary. Previously, there were some duplications and misuse of
statics, which have now been addressed. We’ve moved towards a cleaner dependency injection model, reading configurations
at startup and ensuring consistency across different parts of the system. This has streamlined the startup process and
made it more robust.

#### Upcoming Tasks

**Testing and Integration**

The next steps involve extensive testing to ensure that the fixes we’ve implemented are stable across various scenarios.
We need to integrate the recent changes and ensure that everything works cohesively. This includes creating physical
connections between nodes and testing the handshake process more thoroughly.

**Improving Developer Experience**

We’re also focusing on improving the developer experience. The example of the Ping contract has been simplified
significantly, making it a great “hello world” application to demonstrate the ease of developing on Freenet. We plan to
write guides and provide building blocks to help developers create their applications more efficiently.

**Tooling and Debugging Enhancements**

To aid in debugging, especially with multiple nodes, we are considering improving our logging and tracing tools. While
we already have some tools in place, they need refinement to better handle complex scenarios. Additionally, we might
invest time in fixing our transaction history UI, which is currently broken, to provide a clearer overview of operations
across nodes.

#### Goals and Future Plans

**Demo Preparation**

We aim to prepare a demo for an upcoming talk on May 31st. The goal is to showcase the working aspects of Freenet,
particularly the Ping contract, to demonstrate its capabilities. This will be a significant milestone, allowing us to
show tangible progress and attract interest from potential users and contributors.

**Long-term Vision**

Our long-term vision includes making Freenet a plug-and-play solution where users can easily start nodes and interact
with decentralized applications. Achieving this will require continued effort to refine the network's stability, improve
the developer experience, and ensure seamless integration of all components.
